# D3
Data Driven Documents is a javascript library that is built on *HTML*, *Javascript*, *CSS* and *SVG*. It is a low level
library that works directly with the DOM to produce complex visualizations and great flexibility.

In the matrix of low level languages, one can think of SVG and Canvas as Assembly, D3 as C or C++, libraries like NVD3
 that are built on top of D3 as Python.
 
## Data Driven
D3 is a declarative data rendering library, that offers a functional programming like interface to its inner capabilities.
Instead of coding up *how* a chart or a visual is rendered, you simply state *what* it is that you want rendered. D3 will 
then figure out the best way to perform the task for you. 
*Think of it as the difference between a procedural language like Java (with for loops and such), and SQL.*

D3's programming interface is *fluid*: A call to the API returns back the element on which you can make subsequent calls, 
further enriching the element as you like. An example of this is as follows

```javascript
d3.select('svg')
    .selectAll("circle")
    .data(data)
    .enter()
    .append("circle")
```

Here, an `svg` element on the page is selected, and `circle` elements are created by joining them with the provided `data`.
The elements are then appended as child elements to `svg`.

The key to D3's rendering here is in the following steps
 1. The element selection before the data joining: The `selectAll` call (Creates an empty selection to bind data).
 1. The data joining: The `data` call (Binds data to the empty selection).
 1. The selection after the data join: The `enter` call (Selects all bound data elements not displayed)
 1. The addition of newly created or updated elements to the parent svg element: The `append` call (Creates svg elements for the bound data)
 

You can think of Joins in D3 in much the same way as you would for joins across Database tables, where you can combine two
related tables using a common key. For D3, the join goes across the `data` points and HTML elements. D3 has a concept of
a `key` that maps data to elements. As long as the data has the same `key`, it will always map to the same element.

When the code above is run for the first time, the `selectAll` call will return an empty selection. When we bind it with
our data using the `data` call, it will create a new set of HTML elements and join these to each of the data points in 
 the `data` variable. This set of **new** HTML elements that are associated with the data points, will be returned by the call to the `enter`
function, which are then `appended` as `circle` elements that will be children of the initially selected `svg` element.

If we run through the same code a second time, **nothing** will happen. This reason for this is, since the data didn't change, the
`key` of the bound data didn't change, and so there will be no *new* html elements created, which means the call to 
 `enter` will return nothing, which will result in no new element being `appended` as a child to the `svg` element. This
 is where the strength of the declarative syntax lies where the library figures out what data points are new or that changed
 and creates only the delta of new or modified elements from the existing ones. This can be used to build complex animations 
 as data points change from frame to frame.
 
This process is explained well in the blog post [Thinking with Joins](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/join/) which is the core to working in D3.
From the post, you can think of joins as a Venn diagram where the left circle represents the data points to be bound to 
HTML elements, the right circle as the HTML (or SVG) elements to be bound to data points, and the intersection of these 
 two as the HTML SVG elements currently on our HTML page that have already bound to data points from a previous call to this code. 
 The `enter` call, returns the non-intersected part of the left circle which are the rows of the data that have not yet 
 been added to the web page, that we will subsequently add as associated elements to our web page for each row of the data with the `append` call.
 The intersection of the circles represents the `update` section, which corresponds to elements on our web page that have already 
 been associated with data rows from a previous call. To get these HTML elements you would just skip the `enter` call in the code
 above. You would typically use this set of elements to update their styles of data values indicating an updated data point (not an new one ).
 Finally the non-intersected part of the right circle represents HTML elements bound to data points from a previous call, for which 
 the data points don't exist anymore. These are obtained by the `exit` call. You could typically use this set of HTML elements
 to style or to delete them from the web page indicating, they no longer represent any row in the data.
 
 An interesting implementation detail of D3 is at the end of the `data(data)` call, you get a collection of temporary
 HTML elements represented as instances of the `EnterNode` objects, each with an attribute called `__data__` that holds a reference to a Javascript POJO that is one row
 of the `data`. When you execute the `append('circle')` call, the `EnterNodes` are converted to `circle` element instances.
 
 This is another [example](https://bost.ocks.org/mike/join/) that explains the join process.
 
 ## Drawing a Visualization
 To render out some visualization of data, you need to run through the following basic steps.
 
 ### Create svg elements joined to the data rows
 This is done using the sequence of code described above, where you `join` the data with SVG elements using the 
  ```javascript
d3.select(svgElement)
    .selectAll()
    .data()
    .enter()
    .append()
``` 
sequence

### Create the Scale: Map the range of the data to the browser real-estate
Next you would need to scale the data so that it renders within the height and width of the specified parent SVG element.
To do this, you would need to `scale` the data (using various measures like linear, logarithmic, time, ordinal etc.)
and specify the min and max values of the data using the `domain()` function and the min and max pixel values using the
`range` function like so.
 
 ```javascript
let timeScale = d3.scaleTime()
    .range([left_point, right_point])
    .domain([minData, maxData])
    
let dataScale = d3.scaleTime()
    .range([bottom_point, top_point])
    .domain([minData, maxData])
```
 
The `scaleXXX` function automatically figures out the function that best maps the range of the domain (data) values to the
range of the browser pixel values. 

*One quirk of SVG to be mindful of when specifying this for the vertical axis: The pixel values increase as one goes form top
 to bottom in the SVG element. However, in a typical graph, the Y-axis values increase when you go bottom to top. Therefore,
 when mapping domain values to Y-axis ranges, you typically map the lowest domain value of the height (max) value of the pixel
 and the higher domain value of the lowest (min) value of the pixel.
 
D3 also offers a function called `d3.extent` that takes in a data range and figures out the min and max values (extent) of it.
This is also used in most cases. To work with data where the row is an entire object you use the second parameter of `extent`
which is a custom function that can be used to map a data row object to a single data point.

```javascript
let xAxisExtent = d3.extent(data, function(d) {
  return d["field"];
})
```

### Create the Axes 
The Axes for the chart are created using the `d3.axisLeft` or `d3.axisBottom` functions. Each of these functions take in
the scales for the X and Y axis data that was created in the previous section.

```javascript
let xAxis = d3.axisBottom(timeScale);
let yAxis = d3.axisLeft(dataScale);
```
As with the data points, the d3 axes objects created above need to be mapped to the browser DOM elements to provide 
visual representation to the D3 axes objects. i.e. These objects exist as pure JS POJOs and need associated HTML elements
that are appended to the parent SVG for them to appear on the browser page. This can be done as follows

```javascript
d3.select('.world_cup_svg')
                    .append('g')
                    .attr('class', 'x axis')
                    .attr('transform', 'translate(0,' + this.height)
                    .call(xAxis);
                
d3.select('.world_cup_svg')
    .append('g')
    .attr('class', 'y axis')
    .attr('transform', 'translate(' + this.margin + ", 0)")
    .call(yAxis)
```
The thing to note is the x-axis is originally placed as a horizontal line at the top of the SVG container element, so it
needs to be positioned vertically at the bottom. This is done using the css `translate` attribute that moves it to the 
coordinates `(0, height)`. Same for the Y-Axis to move it to `(margin, 0)`

### Position the points
The DOM elements for the points were actually created in the very first step, when we appended `circle` elements to 
each of the `data` rows, using the `enter` call of the data join process. These circles now need to be positioned in the
right place and styled to the desired size and color like so

```javascript
d3.selectAll('circle')
                    .attr('cx', (d) => timeScale(d["date"]))
                    .attr('cy', (d) => countScale(d["attendance"]))
                    .attr("r", this.radius);
```

Note that we are using the `scale` which is the function returned to us by D3 that maps the data point values to pixel
 values. To use these functions, we pass it the data point value, and have it return back to us the pixel value, which 
 we then use to position the `circle` svg element at the right location on the graph.
 
 

